Title: Building PIL against MacPorts on Snow Leopard
Slug: pil-woes
Date: 2010-10-11 19:54:00
Lang: en
Tags: dependency hell, os x, pil, python

I spent hours getting this to work so I thought it best to share it, esp. since so many others seem
to be having the [_jpeg_resync_to_restart error][1]. The problem affected me in the
following way: PIL depends on *libjpeg*, which was present on my system but failing to load and
caused import errors the `_imaging` package. 

    >>> from PIL import _imaging
    Traceback (most recent call last):
    File "", line 1, in
    ImportError: dlopen(/Library/Python/2.6/site-packages/PIL/_imaging.so, ↩
      2): Symbol not found: _jpeg_resync_to_restart
    Referenced from: /Library/Python/2.6/site-packages/PIL/_imaging.so
    Expected in: flat namespace in /Library/Python/2.6/site-packages/PIL/_imaging.so

After flailing about for a while, I had discovered that I could get the thing to
compile and work fine on Python 2.6, but not Python 2.5 (which I need). The significant
difference between these with regard to *libjpeg* is that 2.5 runs in 32bit while 2.6 runs in 64bit.
This was confirmed by doing this: 

    >> import platform
    >>> platform.architecture()
    ('32bit', '')

I spent what seemed like en eternity trying out possible combinations of
*gcc*, `-arch` flags, *Imaging* and *libjpeg* builds. What finally worked for me was to build
against the [MacPorts][2] installation of *libjpeg*. 

## The process

This assumes you have MacPorts installed. If not, then I guess you are some
sort of developer god who wouldn't need my help with trivial matters such as this one. 

1.  Make sure there are universal binaries of *libjpeg*. I made sure I had both versions
   available (just in case): 

        sudo port install jpeg +universal
        sudo port install jpeg6b +universal

1.  Get *Imaging* (1.1.7 is the latest when this is written): 

        curl -C - -O http://effbot.org/media/downloads/Imaging-1.1.7.tar.gz
        tar xzf Imaging-1.1.7.tar.gz

1.  Direct the *Imaging* build process to the libraries:I did this by editing
   *Imaging-1.1.7/setup.py* to make sure `JPEG_ROOT` was set like this: 

        JPEG_ROOT = "/opt/local"

1.  Make sure you are building for all architectures: 

        export CC="gcc -arch i386 -arch x86_64 -arch ppc"

1.  Build and install *Imaging*. I needed this to work for for 2.5 so I did it this way: 

        cd Imaging-1.1.7
        python2.5 setup.py build
        sudo python2.5 setup.py install --optimize=1

    You may want to do it in an active virtualenv or simply for your normal
    Python install: 

        cd Imaging-1.1.7
        python setup.py build
        sudo python setup.py install --optimize=1

   You may have to do this step for any (virtual or otherwise) environment you work
   in to ensure that PIL gets installed in site-packages for every environment you
   need it in.

* * *

And that's all I know. If this doesn't work for you then please don't ask me for help
because I am simply not qualified to provide it.

[1]: http://www.google.com/search?q=_jpeg_resync_to_restart
[2]: http://www.macports.org/
